Add :value macro capture designator (#3106)
rust-lang/rfcs: 0000-macro-value.md

- Feature Name: `macro_value`
- Start Date: 2021-03-27
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Add a new macro_rules matcher, `$name:value`, with identical semantics to that of a function capture.

Reviewer: Is "function capture" accurate?

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Value arguments to function-like macros are tricky to deal with.
While macro_rules macros don't suffer from the common and most egregious pitfalls of C-style preprocessor macros,

> such as misnested brackets and operator precedence,

Reviewer: Hmm... Are you sure this "jab" contributes to the RFC?

Author: I replaced

> the common and most egregious pitfalls of C-style

with just

> the most common pitfalls of C-style

to remove the blame connotation.

An explicit design choice for `macro_rules!` was hygenic macros that avoid the "dumb token substitution" problems that result from simple preprocessor macros as provided by C. I do think it's worth connecting this feature to that pattern of removing misexpansion from naive macros.

using an `$:expr` capture more than once still evaluates the expression more than once,
duplicating side effects.

Additionally,
we have the additional wrinkle of the lifetime and drop timing of temporaries complicating matters further,
if your intent is to write a macro invocation with equivalent-to-function-call semantics.
Suffice to say,
`let arg = $arg;` has the incorrect drop behavior,
and the current best practice is to instead expand to

```rust
match ( $arg0, $arg1, ) {
    ( arg0, arg1, ) => { /* macro body */ }
}
```

> instead.

Reviewer 2: nit: this word is redundant -- "instead expand to <code> instead."

We can simplify this and make getting the correct behavior easier on macro authors.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

> (in a section explaining `macro_rules` matchers:)

Reviewer: Spurious comment?

Author: This may or may not be useful, but it is intended, to indicate the context of _when_ a guide/learner would be expected to explain/learn about `$:value`.

While `$:expr` is good for capturing an expression and copying that expression into the macro-expanded code,
it does exactly that: it duplicates the captured expression to every expansion of the capture.
If, for example, you wrote the trivial `min!` macro,

```rust
macro_rules! min {
    ( $a:expr, $b:expr ) => {
        if $a <= $b { $a } else { $b }
    };
}
```

then both `$a` and `$b` are evaluated twice,
once at each expansion point,
as opposed to a single time,
as would be the case if [`min` were a function](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cmp/fn.min.html).
If you want the arguments to the macro to be evaluated a single time,
as if they were simple function arguments,
you can use the `$:value` matcher:

```rust
macro_rules! min {
    ( $a:value, $b:value ) => {
        if $a <= $b { $a } else { $b }
    };
}
```

This time,

> `$a` and `$b` are evaluated a single time upon invoking the macro,

Reviewer 3: This is confusing because macros are not "invoked" at runtime.

Author: Would
```suggestion
`$a` and `$b` are evaluated a single time when control flow enters the macro,
```
be clearer?

Reviewer 3: "expanded macro" and then yes!

and each expansion of the capture refers to the same value,
just like function arguments.

> (no need to mention temporary lifetimes in the guide.)

Reviewer: Spurious comment?

Author: This is less rationalized than the previous, but still intentional. It's basically just an explicit acknowledgement that one of the main motivators of the feature isn't even mentioned in the guide explanation.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

A new macro matching mode,
`$:value`,

> is added.

Reviewer: Not sure why there are so many new lines across the source. It makes it hard to read in non-rendered mode (which partially defeats the purpose of Markdown).

Reviewer 4: A pattern I've seen is to use newlines after punctuation. The reasoning there is to reduce the diff noise of subsequent changes, as English prose often changes inside a clause, but less frequently between it. Using "arbitrary" newlines (e.g. at 80 columns) leads to a cascading series of diffs if you add enough words to an early line.

Reviewer: A smarter diff for Markdown in GitHub would be useful :)

Author: Yeah, and actually the rich diff does pretty okay at it. I probably did too much newlines in this document, but there's a happy medium somewhere. In any case, completely unwrapped text is worse than overly wrapped (in my opinion), and maintaining "reasonable" wrapping in a consistently updated document is annoying.

It also helps me pay attention to my clause length. If I'm just writing without thinking about it, I tend to get super long sentences, with (potentially many) levels of indirection, and it becomes difficult to read -- so I have ended up with some (kludgy but workable) workflow things to help balance it.<sup>[1]</sup>

[1]: yes this mess of a run-on was on purpose to illustrate the point

It captures the same grammar,
has the same follow set,
and can be expanded in the same positions as `$:expr`.

A `macro_rules` macro capturing an expression as `$:value` can only be used in expression position,
not any other position
(item, type, etc.).
As such,
extra information is provided to the compiler that it MAY use for nicer error messages.
(When expanding an expression-position-only macro in item position,

>  the current 1.51 rustc says

Reviewer: Swapped order (and please avoid "current", that will change soon for future readers).

There are also spurious spaces at the beginning of the lines.

```suggestion
 `rustc` 1.51 says
```

Author: Spaces at the beginning of the line was my kludgy way of indicating that we're still in the parenthetical :)

    ( /* other captures */ $name:value /* other captures */ ) => {
        /* macro body */
    };
    /* other arms */
}
// "desugars" to
macro_rules! mac! {
    /* other arms */
    ( /* other captures */ $name:expr /* other captures */ ) => {
        match $name {
            name => {
                /* macro body, $name replaced with name (hygienically) */
            }
        }
    };
    /* other arms */
}
```

but the compiler is expected to also handle the case where `$:value` is inside of a macro repetition,
which cannot be directly implemented by just a desugaring of the `macro_rules!` invocation.

To illustrate (one of) the differences in lifetimes, consider temporary lifetime extension:

```rust
macro_rules! mlet {
    ( $e:expr ) => {{
        let e = $e;
        e
    }};
}

macro_rules! mmatch {
    ( $e:expr ) => {
        match $e {
            e => e,
        }
    };
}

fn mfn<T>(e: T) -> T {
    e
}

struct Wrap(&'static str);
impl Drop for Wrap {
    fn drop(&mut self) {}
}

fn a() { let _a = mlet!  (&Wrap("a")); } // borrowck error
fn b() { let _b = mmatch!(&Wrap("b")); } // compiles
fn c() { let _c = mfn    (&Wrap("c")); } // compiles
```

> plus there are other differences with drop timing of temporaries,

Reviewer: It would be best to explain those differences.

Author: I know and.... I'm not perfectly aware of what they all are, thus the sidestep here.

especially with macros used in statement position rather than expression position.
Using `:value` gives the known behavior of a function argument,
rather than "however you used it."

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

For one, `$:value` is another thing that has to be learned to write effective `macro_rules!` macros.

> However, it replaces the `match` trick, so the author believes this comes out nuetral.

Reviewer: Typo.

Author: No, I just can't spell. 😅

Of course, it expands the language, where a code solution is sufficient, if not elegant.

Additionally,
this would be the first `macro_rules!` macro where a capture isn't plain token (tree) substitution.
If the `match` trick is actually fully equivalent to function argument semantics,

> (the author believes this to be true but hasn't exhaustively shown this,)

Reviewer: Spurious comma.

Author: A parenthetical placed at the end of a clause requiring a comma is the bane of my writing (because my voice likes using them so much, but I don't know the exact rules for where the comma is supposed to go). Also this may be one of those things that differs between American English and British English, like the placement of a comma at the end of a quote (that does not originally end with a comma, and the comma is part of the outer sentence).

then tools such as `cargo expand` (`-Z unpretty`) can use it as the macro expansion.
But still, this moves `macro_rules!` away from just being token (tree) substitution,
and gives `macro_rules!` a superpower that isn't available to function-like proc macros.

> # Alternatives

Reviewer 5: Can this be implemented using a proc macro?

I think the hard constrain on the feature is that the output of `mac!()` using the `value` matcher must be representable as a regular token stream.
(In this sense the "which cannot be directly implemented by just a desugaring of the `macro_rules!` invocation" part sounds a bit concerning.)

But if it can be represented as a token stream, then it should be implementable as a proc macro as well.

Author: What this is trying to convey is that `$:value` cannot be implemented as a `macro_rules!` to `macro_rules!` transformation. The `match` trick has the exact semantics that we want here, so the semantics can be gotten by a simple token tree expansion (and thus by proc macros aware of the `match` trick). When I say this would be something `macro_rules!` has that proc macros don't, I'm specifically referring to the `$:value` shorthand, not any expressive power.

As an example,

```rust
macro_rules! sum_twice {
    ( $( $x:value ),+ $(,)? ) => ( 0 $( + $x )* $( + $x)* );
}

sum_twice( $a, $b, $c );
```

has no `macro_rules!` way to implement the desired semantics (due to the repetition), but can potentially expanded as

```rust
match $a { x$a =>
  match $b { x$b =>
    match $c { x$c =>
      0 + x$a + x$b + x$c + x$a + x$b + x$c
    ,}
  ,}
,}
```

(In practice I'm not sure how reasonable actually expanding to this or some other more compact MIR form would be.)

then `Deref::deref_mut` would be called.
If the capture is expanded only once,
this behaves identically to an `$:expr` capture,
except for the evaluation timing of side effects.

However, `$:place` adds a new concept to Rust,
that of capturing a _place_ directly.
This is entirely impossible in surface Rust today.
This form of capturing may be more intuitive to macro authors
(who are already used to and use similar behavior from `$:expr`).
However,
as this is much more complicated on the implementation side than a simple `$:value`,
and `$:value` offers most of the benefit of `$:place` without the extra implementation complexity,
`$:place` is just offered here as an alternative.

## `macro fn`
[macro_fn]: #macro-fn

Another possibility that's been discussed is `macro fn`.
Basically, these would be `fn`, and have the semantics of `fn`,
but be duck typed (like macros) and semantically copy/pasted into the calling scope.
This is basically the exact feature that "`macro_rules!` with function-like captures" is trying to serve,
except for one important thing: a `macro fn` is (potentially) still a `fn` in that it has one fixed airity,
and can't be overloaded like a macro can.

> Basically, `macro fn` is asking for "macros 2.0,"

Reviewer: Spurious comma.

Author: This comma is part of

> asking for macros 2.0, which is still desirable, but still 

so isn't it required here? (Does British English put the comma outside the quotes? I know the American English rules put the comma inside the quotes (and the Rust project generally prefers American English).)

Reviewer 6: @CAD97 In technical writing, it's entirely normal to always put punctuation outside the quotes if it's not part of what's being quoted, following the British English quoting style even in otherwise American English writing.

and instead can just use the `$:value` matcher to get function-argument semantics.
Thus, while adding to the semantics provided by the Rust compiler,
it reduces the needed complexity to write correct `macro_rules!`.

Additionally,
it is impossible to have a repetition of expr captures that has function-argument like drop timing through use of the `match` trick alone,
as it requires knowing the airity of the captures ahead of time to name each capture.
`$:value` directly unlocks properly and fully variadic macros that act like function calls with respect to temporary lifetimes.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Kotlin's [`inline fn`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/inline-functions.html) behave similarly to (typechecked) macros.
Semantically, `inline fn` is inlined into the call site,
allowing things like `return`/`break`/`continue`ing from the calling scope.
Otherwise, `inline fn` behaves semantically like a function call.

[POV-Ray's macros](http://www.povray.org/documentation/3.7.0/r3_3.html#r3_3_2_8_3)
are also interesting for comparison.

The author knows of no other languages with macro-like functionality

> that isn't just textual or lexical replacement.

Reviewer: There have been similar proposals to other languages, coming either from the point of view of macros or from the one of functions.

For instance, there was at least one C++ proposal to add the opposite to templates. That is, so that templates could also capture expressions rather than just values.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- Would `$:value` or `$:place` be more desirable to have in the language?
  How much more complicated _would_ `$:place` be to implement?
- How exactly should `$:value`(/`$:place`) be treated by `cargo expand` (`-Z unpretty`)?
  - `$:value` can probably just use the `match` trick,
    reducing semantic loss to just hygiene/name clashes,
    which is already expected.
  - `$:place` is a big unknown,
    and probably the best it can do is a `$:value` match
    by-value, by-ref, or by-ref-mut as appropriate.
- Do we want to (can we) provide similar "correctness shortcuts" to proc macros,
  rather than leaving them to rely on the `match` trick?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> If `$:value` is accepted now, `$:place` could be accpeted later if deemed necessary.

Reviewer: Typo.

`$:place` is usable in all the places `$:value` would be used

> (and saves a semantic move/copy before optimization,)

Reviewer: Spurious comma.

Author: This comma is required for the `, but`; where should it go, I don't know at this point.
